An investigation into the supply and demand for The Video Streaming Market

By Samuel Summers

In less than 2 decades since the introduction of Netflix as a niche alternative to traditional movie renting, the global video streaming market has transformed into a massive global industry valued at over £190b as of Feb 2026. Once dominated by Netflix, the market has evolved into a highly competitive oligopoly with firms competing on price and technological advancements. Today the market is dominated by a handful of large firms, namely Disney+, Prime video, netflix and apple tv which make up 52-58% of market share.














Demand
Demand is defined as the quantity of a good or service that consumers are both willing and able to buy at a given price and quantity over a specific period of time. Demand in essence is the desire to own a product, backed up by the financial capability to do so.

There are various factors that influence the demand for a specific streaming platform and firms use these factors to their advantage in an effort to gain users, increase their market share and overall, make more profit. These factors are:

Price
As shown by the law of demand, a decrease in price will cause a movement along the demand curve, increasing demand. Due to the relatively inelastic nature of demand, due to strong brand loyalty as well as difficulty to cancel (however, becoming more easy due to gov. regulation), a change in price will not affect the demand greatly.
This is shown by the aggressive price increases in recent years called “streamflation”. For example, Netflix has raised its premium streaming tier drastically from about £12.99 in 2016 to £23.99 in the space of 7 years.
This aggressive pricing however has had a limited impact on the demand for netflix however, has had a limited impact on the demand as the subscriber count during this time period has risen sharply from 80m to 260m in the 7 year span, a 225% increase.

Income
For most products (normal goods), an increase in consumer disposable income leads to an increase in demand, shifting the demand curve right and increasing the quantity demanded. However, streaming can act as a relatively inexpensive substitute to entertainment like cinema. This means streaming services are not entirely dependent on the state of the economy.
This was shown most notably during the covid 19 pandemic in 2020, where a drop in disposable income by 4.3% did not cause any noticeable change to the growing subscriber count of Netflix. Whereas, the demand for clothes, an elastic good, was noticeably impacted during this period - according to the McKinsey Global Fashion Index, global fashion industry profits declined by approximately 90% in 2020.

Tastes and Fashion
If a product becomes more fashionable or consumer preferences change, the demand curve will shift rightwards, affecting the quantity demanded as well as raising price.
This was shown to affect streaming services again during the covid-19 lockdowns where “binge-watching” became more popular, a change in consumer tastes, which caused a large increase in the number of subscribers to Netflix.
This was also affected by the release of popular releases such as squid games and stranger things which caused large spikes in subscriber counts.

Advertising
Successful advertising to a consumer market increases brand awareness, thus making demand more inelastic and shifting the demand curve outwards.
For example, Disney famously spent an estimated $250m to advertise the launch of their streaming service disney+, utilising its current capital investment (namely in its theme parks and billboards) to drive over 10 million signups to the platform on its first day of operation.

Population
As population increases so does demand as the target market of a product naturally increases in size, causing an outwards shift in demand. An increase in a target market due to technological advancements also causes the same effect.
This was shown in where the global expansion of high-speed internet (required for streaming) opened up large new populations to streaming services. Streaming platforms due to this are experiencing the majority of their growth now in highly populated developing countries across Asia and Africa - this has caused an increase from 2.6 to 5.8 million subscribed users to Netflix in Africa alone, however as the services are offered at lower prices in this areas (to capture a larger market share), this increase in demand has not caused a large increase in the revenue received by Netflix.


Analysis of the graph
Many of these factors cause a shift of the demand curve from D to D1 causing an increase in QD and in price






Supply
Supply is defined as the quantity of a good or service that producers are both willing and able to offer for sale at a given price over a specific time period. According to the Law of supply, there is a direct relationship between P and QS so, assuming all other factors remain the same, theory suggests an increase in supply will cause an increase in QD and therefore suppliers (in this case disney+, netflix etc) are incentivised to, at a small scale, expand their collection of movies and tv shows and in the bigger picture, grow their infrastructure.

Like demand, many factors influence the supply of a product. These factors are:

Cost of production
A firm’s supply curve is directly related to its cost of production. If input costs such as labour, raw materials or licensing increase, profit margins per unit supplied decrease. This makes production less prof	itable at any given price level causing a left shift and a decrease in supply, which leads to less QD.
The primary cost in this industry is licensing. Netflix for example, spent a 74% split of their 2022 $2.6B costs on cost of revenues (i.e the cost to supply a product); 54% of this was spent on licensing.
In order to cut these fixed costs, Netflix (and other streaming services) must either reduce the number of content (reducing quality and therefore demand) or create their own content which has proved very profitable and effective in the case of Netflix, with 72% of users reporting having watched a Netflix original series within the first 2 quarters of 2022

Technology
Advancements in productivity increase productivity and efficiency, allowing firms to produce a higher output at a lower variable cost, this causes a rightwards shift in supply. As such large streaming companies like Netflix spend roughly 10% of their TC in research and development into technological advancements.
As streaming relies heavily on cloud computing, over the last decade, research into video compression (for example AV1 in part developed by amazon and netflix) has allowed streaming platforms to provide a higher quality service in the form of higher definition videos at a lower cost due to less compute power being required to serve the same amount of streaming. This has increased the productive capacity of streaming platforms.

Gov. Tax and Subsidies
A gov. Tax on a firm increases its cost of production which decreases profitability, therefore incentivising producers not to supply and causing a left shift, decreasing supply. Conversely, a gov. subsidy is a financial grant given to a firm, encouraging supply, this lowers cost of production and shifts supply left, increasing supply
Many governments offer tax relief to attract film and television productions in their country as it is beneficial to the local economy, creating jobs and increasing cultural influence. For example, the UK gov. offers HETV (high end television) tax relief in which streaming companies are allowed to claim large tax rebates on production costs incurred within the UK. This directly incentivises streaming platforms looking to reduce their reliance on licensing to supply their own content from British studios
Gov. subsidies increase supply (outward shift) causing an increase in quantity demanded.

What has happened to price and quantity?
In recent years, the global video streaming market has experienced simultaneous shifts in both supply and demand. This has led to dramatic adjustments in both the equilibrium price and quantity, causing an increase in the total aggregate revenue of this market to rise by approx. 212% from $48b dollars to $137b between 2019 and 2026. Even accounting for inflation, at a total rate of 30% between the 7 years, this is a huge increase, reflecting the on average doubling of subscriber counts of all major streaming services during this time period.






As you can see from my diagram, assuming unitary elastic supply and demand, as well as an equal shift in both supply and demand from S and D to S₁ and D₁, price does not change, staying at P, however quantity increases hugely from Q to Q₁.
This would cause a large increase in revenue for the firm, however, this is highly theoretical.

Creating an accurate supply graph for the streaming market is difficult because calculating the PES is challenging. Streaming companies do not report a clear quantity supplied, as they provide a digital service rather than a tangible product. However, it can be argued that the PES is greater than 1 (elastic). This is because the marginal cost of supplying the service to an additional customer is very low relative to the subscription price. As a result, firms such as Netflix can increase the number of customers served with relatively little increase in costs, which helps explain the viability of lower-priced subscription tiers.

Future of this market
